---
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
title: Using Astro Style Tags
---
## BY THE END OF THIS SECTION YOU WILL HAVE:
- Used Astro `<style></style>` tags to style items on the page
- Applied some styles globally using the `is:global` attribute 
- Defined and used CSS variables using `define:vars` directive

Now that you have more content on your page, let's style it!

## Summary
Using Astro's own `<style></style>` tags, you can style items on your page. Adding *attributes* and *directives* gives you even more ways to style!

### Adding a Style Tag

1. Copy the following code and past it into `src/pages/about.astro` immediately after the code fence, before the `<html>` tag:

```
<style>
    h1 {
        color: purple;
    }
</style>
```
Check all three pages your browser preview. Which color is the title of:

- your home page?  __________
- your about page? __________
- your blog page? ___________

2. Copy the following code and past it into `src/pages/blog.astro` immediately after the code fence, before the `<html>` tag:

```
<style>
    .skill {
       color: green;
       font-weight: bold;
    }
</style>
```

Visit your blog page in your browser and you should not see any changes. That's because there are no HTML elements with the class name of `skill` yet.

3. Update your unordered list of skills on your blog page by adding the class name `skill` to the generated line items. Your code should now look like this:
4. 
```
<p>My skills are:<p>
<ul>
    {skills.map( (skill) => <li class="skill">{skill}</li>}
</ul>
```
Visit your blog page in your browser again, and verify that each item in your list of skills is now green.
### 

## Test your knowledge:

Fill in the blanks with **Netlify**, **VS Code** and **GitHub**:

1. ________ is a code editor, where I will make changes to my project files and their content.
2. ________ is an online storage provider for my repository.
3. ________ is a web host, for deploying my website to the internet at a unique web address.


## Checklist for moving on:
[ ] I 