---
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

## BY THE END OF THIS SECTION YOU WILL HAVE:
- created a new folder for components in your project
- built an Astro component to generate your navigation links
- replaced existing HTML in each page with a new, reusable navigation component

Now that you have the same HTML written in multiple pages of your Astro site, let's replace that duplicated content with a reusable Astro component!

## Create a Navigation Component
To hold `.astro` files that will generate HTML but that will not become new pages on your website, you will need a new folder in your project source outside of `/pages/`. 

### Create a new `/components/` folder
1. Create a new file at the location `src/components/Navigation.astro` (You may have to create a new folder first.)
2. Copy the code you have already written in `index.astro` to navigate between your pages, and paste it into your new file, `Navigation.astro`
```
<a href="/">Home</a>
<a href="/about">About</a>
<a href="/blog">Blog</a>
```
### Import the component on each page
1. Go back to `index.astro` and add the following line of code to the top of the component script, inside the code fence:
```astro
import Navigation from '../components/Navigation.astro';
```
2. In your component template, replace the existing navigation HTML link elements with the navigation component you just imported:
```diff
- <a href="/">Home</a>
- <a href="/about">About</a>
- <a href="/blog">Blog</a>
+ <Navigation />
```
3. Check the preview in your browser and notice that it should look exactly the same... and that's what we want! Your site contains the same HTML as it did before. Now, however, those three lines of code are being generated by your `<Navigation />` component. 
#### Try it Yourself!
Import and render the `<Navigation />` component in the other two pages `about.astro` and `blog.astro` using the same method.

[HINTS]
- import statement at the top of the component script, inside the code fence
- replace the existing code with the navigation component

:::note
Mention that this is called **refactoring**!
:::

## Create a Footer Component
1. Create a new file at the location `src/components/Footer.astro`.
2. Copy the following code you into your new file, `Footer.astro`.
```
---
const social = "Twitter"
---
<p>Learn more about my projects on <a href=`https://www.${social}.com`>{social}</a>!</p>
```

3. Write the following import statement in each of your three Astro pages (`index.astro`, `about.astro`, and `blog.astro`) just below where you imported your Navigation component:
```astro
import Footer from '../components/Footer.astro';
```
4. Add a new `<Footer />` component in your Astro template on each page, just before the closing `</body>` tag to display your footer at the bottom of the page. 
5. In your browser preview, check that you can see your new footer text on each page.
6. Bonus: Customize your footer output to use a different social network (e.g. Instagram, GitHub, LinkedIn) and/or your username to link directly to your own profile!

#### Check-In
If you've been following along with each step in the tutorial, your `index.astro` file should look like this:







## Test your knowledge:

Fill in the blanks with **Netlify**, **VS Code** and **GitHub**:

1. ________ is a code editor, where I will make changes to my project files and their content.
2. ________ is an online storage provider for my repository.
3. ________ is a web host, for deploying my website to the internet at a unique web address.


## Checklist for moving on:
[ ] I 