---
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

## Goals

BY THE END OF THIS SECTION YOU WILL HAVE:

- generated multiple page routes dynamically from a single Astro component 

- used `[bracket]` notation to identify the dynamic route parameter

- exported a `getStaticPaths()` function to specify exactly which paths will be pre-rendered


## Dynamic Page Routing

Just like we used `Astro.glob()` to allow us to generate a list of all blog posts, without needing to write a separate list item for each post, we can create entire sets of pages dynamically using `getStaticPaths()`.

To start, we will create a **static** page for an individual blog tag. And then, we will convert this static page into one that creates dynamic routes: one for every blog tag we use on the site.

### Create a static page placeholder

1. Create a new file at `src/pages/tags/` (you will make a new folder) with the filename `tag.astro` and add the following code:

```astro
---
import BaseLayout from '../../layouts/BaseLayout.astro';

let title = "tag"; 
---
<BaseLayout title={title}>
   
        <p>Posts tagged with {title}</p>    

</BaseLayout>
```

2. Visit `localhost:3000/tags/tag` in your browser (or add `/tags/tag` to the end of your preview URL) and verify that you have a new page on your site.

### Create a Dynamic Page

3. Convert this static route (one file -> one page) to a dynamic route (one file -> many pages) by first **renaming the page to `[tag].astro`** (add brackets around the word "tag") and **exporting a `getStaticPaths()` function** in the component script.

> `src/pages/posts/tags/[tag].astro`

```diff
---
import BaseLayout from '../../layouts/BaseLayout.astro';

+ export async function getStaticPaths({ }) {

+ }

let title = "tag"; 
---
<BaseLayout title={title}>
   
        <p>Posts tagged with <em><span>{title}</span></em></p>    

</BaseLayout>
```

Note: This function is not yet complete, so your browser preview will no longer work. 

4. Add the following **pseudocode** (a description in words of what you would _like_ your code to do, but not the actual code to execute) to your `getStaticPaths()` function:

```diff
---
export async function getStaticPaths({}){

+ // 1. retrieve data from all Markdown posts
 
+ // 2. create a new `Set` for holding all the tags used on the blog 
  
+ // 3. map through all the Markdown files, and add any tags one by one to the Set of tags

+ // 4. turn our Set of tags into an array we can map through

+ // 5. For each tag, filter the blog posts that include it, then return
+        // the name of the tag, for defining our page route
+       // an array of posts that have that tag

}
---
```
We will tackle each piece individually.


### Constructing the `getStaticPaths()` function

We have four tasks written in pseudocode to turn into code. Some will be shorter, and some will be longer.  Some of them you will be familiar with, but some of them might be new to you. That's OK! By the end, you'll have working code that you can inspect further if you need to.

Remember, each of these sections of code will be written _inside_ your `getStaticPaths()` function, in the order they appear.

#### 1. Retrieve Data from all Markdown posts

This should look familiar! You have written this line of code before:

```diff
- // 1. retrieve data from all Markdown posts
+ const allPosts = await Astro.glob('../pages/posts/*.md');

```

#### 2. Create a new, empty `Set` that will hold our tags.

A `Set` is a JavaScript object that is a collection of unique items. It is similar to an array, but it igores repeats! Some of our blog posts may have the same tags (e.g. "learning in public"). But, we want to be able to list all the unique tags, only once each. 

```diff
- // 2. create a new `Set` for holding all the tags used on the blog 
+ const allTags = new Set();
```

#### 3. Go through each post, and add its tags to our new `Set`

Because a `Set` ignores repeated values, we can add safely add every tag from every post. For each post, we will map through its collection of tags, and add every tag to our new tag set. Notice that we are mapping with in a map!

```diff
- // 3. map through the array of `.md` files, and add any tags one by one to the Set of tags
+ allPosts.map(post => {
+      post.frontmatter.tags.map(tag => allTags.add(tag))
+  })
```

#### 4. Convert our set of unique tags into an array

Creating and adding to a set ensures we don't have any duplicates, but an array is useful for mapping through and using those items.

```diff
- // 4. turn our Set of tags into an array we can map through
+ let uniqueTags = Array.from(allTags)
```

#### 5. Define the `return` value of the `getStaticPaths` function

What we want "returned" to us from any `getStaticPaths` function is a set of `params` (what we should call each page route) and optionally, any `props` (data that we want passed into those pages).

In our case, we want each tag name to become a page on our website, and we want each of those pages to "know about" a list of blog posts that include that tag.

Replace the final section of pseudocode with the code below:

```diff
- // 5. For each tag, filter the blog posts that include it, then
-        // the name of the tag, for defining our page route
-       // an array of posts that have that tag

+ return uniqueTags.map((tag) => {
+   const taggedPosts = allPosts.filter((post) => post.frontmatter.tags.includes(tag))
+    return {
+      params: { tag },
+      props: { posts: taggedPosts }
+    };
+  });
```
### Constructing the page template

Now that Astro knows which pages to build, and which props to pass to each page, our page template still needs to **receive** the props, like any Astro page. The will be added to the component script, below `getStaticPaths()`.

#### Try it yourself!

1. Write the line of code that an Astro page needs to receive the posts as the props from `getStaticPaths()`

<details>
<summary>Show the code</summary>
```astro
---
const { posts } = Astro.props
---
```
</details>

2. Write the line of code that an Astro page needs to receive the name of the tag from the parameter `getStaticPaths()`

<details>
<summary>Show the code</summary>
```astro
---
const { tag } = Astro.params
---
```
</details>

Now we can define the template of each individual tag page, and we have available to us:

- the name of the tag itself ( `tag` )
- all the content and properties of every `.md` file that contains that tag in an array (`post`)

Update the page template to inclde the same information used to create our list of all blog posts on our Blog page:

```diff
<BaseLayout title={title}>
   
        <p>Posts tagged with {title}</p>

+        <ul>
+           {posts.map(post => <li><a href={post.url}>{post.frontmatter.title}</a></li>)}
+        </ul>


</BaseLayout>
```

You can even refactor this to use our BlogPost component instead! (Don't forget to import this component at the top of `[tag].astro`, with your layout!)

```diff
<BaseLayout title={title}>
   
        <p>Posts tagged with {title}</p>

        <ul>
-          {posts.map(post => <li><a href={post.url}>{post.frontmatter.title}</a></li>)}        
+          {posts.map(post => <BlogPost url={post.url} title={post.frontmatter.title}/>)}
       </ul>


</BaseLayout>
```

There is one more update to this page we should make. Can you spot it!

<details>
<summary>Give me a hint</summary>
How is your page's title defined in your script?


<details>
<summary>Give me another hint!</summary>
We would like the page title to be the name of the tag, not just the word "tag."

<details>
<summary>Show me the code!</summary>

```diff
const { posts } = Astro.props;
const { tag } = Astro.params;

-let title = "tag"; 
+let title = tag; 
```
</details>

</details>

</details>

Now, you should be able to visit any of your tag pages in your browser preview. Navigate to `localhost:3000/tags/community` and you should see a list of only your blog posts with the tag `community`. Similarly `localhost:3000/tags/learn%20in%20public` should display a list of the blog posts tagged `learning in public`.

In the next section, we'll use `Astro.glob()` again to build a page that will generate that list of linked tags for us automatically.

## Before You Go

### Test your knowledge

### Checklist for moving on